{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\froman\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\froman Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f2\fs24\b Welcome to Kyma Pentatonic Chimes!\plain\f2\fs24 
\par \plain\f2\fs20 
\par This program was written to satisfy my own desire for a wind chime program with unique chime tones and scales. It incorporates a variety of custom chime sounds and pentatonic (5 note) scales from around the world.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b Why Pentatonic Scales? \plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par The simplest definition of a pentatonic scale says, "A pentatonic scale is made up of five notes that sound good when played sequence or together." It is the simplest scale, and perhaps the most widely used, for song-writing and melodic composition. Historically speaking, the pentatonic scale is also the world's oldest as witnessed by the Neolithic bone flute with its five fingerholes.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b What Key are the Scales in?
\par \plain\f2\fs20 
\par Pentatonic scales do not have "keys"as such. They are ratio-based starting from the root note (which may be of any pitch) with four successively higher notes obtained by multiplying the root note by a ratio such as 4/3, 3/2, 9/5 or whatever set of numbers yields the desired difference in note pitches. The choice of root pitch and scale of ratios creates a simple, yet highly effective, "mood".
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b How do I Use Kyma Pentonic Chimes?\plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par The easiest way to familiarize yourself with the operation of Kyma Pentatonic Chimes is to click inside the textbox just below the \plain\f2\fs20\b Preset\plain\f2\fs20  label. This will pop open a dialog showing the available presets. Double-click on a preset name to load it. The textbox below \plain\f2\fs20\b Preset\plain\f2\fs20  will change to show the preset name. The textboxes below \plain\f2\fs20\b Chime\plain\f2\fs20  and \plain\f2\fs20\b Scale\plain\f2\fs20  will also change to show the chime style and scale used by the selected preset. The chimes will begin playing automatically. To stop them click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Stop\plain\f2\fs20  button. To re-start them click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Play\plain\f2\fs20  button. At the right side of the window you will see the note ratios used in the selected scale.
\par 
\par You can easily change the mood or flavor of your selected preset by varying the \plain\f2\fs20\b Wind Speed\plain\f2\fs20 , \plain\f2\fs20\b Relative\plain\f2\fs20  \plain\f2\fs20\b Pitch\plain\f2\fs20  and \plain\f2\fs20\b Volume Differential \plain\f2\fs20 sliders. Slower or lower values are to the left and faster or higher values are to the right. The \plain\f2\fs20\b Wind Speed \plain\f2\fs20 slider sets how fast or slow the notes play. The \plain\f2\fs20\b Relative Pitch \plain\f2\fs20 control determines how high or low the notes sound. The \plain\f2\fs20\b Volume Differential \plain\f2\fs20 sets the difference in volume between the loudest and softest notes.
\par 
\par Changing a \plain\f2\fs20\b Chime\plain\f2\fs20  or \plain\f2\fs20\b Scale\plain\f2\fs20  is also easy. Just click inside the textbox below their label to open a selection dialog. Double-click on the desired chime style or scale to select it. The main window will update to show your selection and it will automatically play for you.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b How do I Create a Preset?\plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par Select a \plain\f2\fs20\b Chime\plain\f2\fs20  and\plain\f2\fs20\b  Scale \plain\f2\fs20 you like. Set the \plain\f2\fs20\b Wind Speed\plain\f2\fs20 , \plain\f2\fs20\b Relative Pitch \plain\f2\fs20 and \plain\f2\fs20\b Volume Differential \plain\f2\fs20 sliders to values that are pleasing to you. Click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Save As Preset \plain\f2\fs20 button. A dialog pops up prompting you to give your new preset a name. Enter its title in the \plain\f2\fs20\b Title \plain\f2\fs20 textbox and, optionally, enter a description of your preset in the \plain\f2\fs20\b Description\plain\f2\fs20  textbox. Click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b OK \plain\f2\fs20 button to save your preset or click on \plain\f2\fs20\b Cancel \plain\f2\fs20 if you change your mind.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b How do I Edit an Existing Preset?\plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par Make whatever changes you wish to the existing preset then click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Delete Preset \plain\f2\fs20 button. A confirmation dialog pops up to ensure that this is really what you intend. Answer \plain\f2\fs20\b Yes\plain\f2\fs20  to delete the current preset or \plain\f2\fs20\b No\plain\f2\fs20  to keep it. Next click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Save As Preset \plain\f2\fs20 button and follow the instructions above giving it a new name.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b Can I Create or Import Scales?\plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par Certainly! There are multitudes of variations on the basic pentatonic theme. You can find examples of them in several places on the Internet. I would suggest starting with www.scala.org where you will find a link to a file of over 2900 scales including many pentatonics. A search using "just intonation" will also yield several pages of links to sites that feature pentatonic scales. Save the scales you find as text files that can be opened in Windows Notebook.
\par 
\par The \plain\f2\fs20\b Root (1st Note) \plain\f2\fs20 and \plain\f2\fs20\b Octave\plain\f2\fs20  \plain\f2\fs20\b (6th Note) \plain\f2\fs20 ratios will always be the same for all scales. To import a scale open it in Windows Notebook and use the classic copy and paste method to insert the note ratio values for the second through fifth notes. Highlight a ratio numerator in Notebook then press \plain\f2\fs20\b Control-C \plain\f2\fs20 to copy it. Next click in the appropriate numerator textbox in Kyma Pentatonic Chimes and press \plain\f2\fs20\b Control-V \plain\f2\fs20 to paste it in. Follow the same procedure for the divisors. Is this a clumsy low-tech method? Probably.... but it is nevertheless quick and effective.
\par 
\par Creating your own scale is done in a similar manner. Click inside a numerator or divisor textbox then enter a number. You will probably have noticed that the numerators are always larger than the divisors. This is because the scales are built as a sequence of ascending pitches built upon the Root note and reaching to the Octave.
\par 
\par You can test your scale using the row of \plain\f2\fs20\b Note Buttons \plain\f2\fs20 beneath the Note label. First click the \plain\f2\fs20\b Stop\plain\f2\fs20  button to stop whatever is currently playing then click on of the \plain\f2\fs20\b Note Buttons \plain\f2\fs20 to hear that note. You can also play the notes individually by holding down the \plain\f2\fs20\b Alt\plain\f2\fs20  key while pressing numerals \plain\f2\fs20\b 1\plain\f2\fs20  through \plain\f2\fs20\b 6 \plain\f2\fs20 on the row above the alpha keys. Press \plain\f2\fs20\b Play \plain\f2\fs20 to hear your scale played using all the notes.
\par 
\par When you have entered all the numerators and divisors click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Save\plain\f2\fs20  button. The Scale Titler dialog will open. Enter a name for your scale then click on \plain\f2\fs20\b Accept\plain\f2\fs20  to save it or \plain\f2\fs20\b Cancel\plain\f2\fs20  if you change your mind.
\par 
\par To delete a scale click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Delete\plain\f2\fs20  button. A confirmation dialog pops open to ensure that this is what you really want to do. Click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Yes\plain\f2\fs20  button to delete the current scale or the \plain\f2\fs20\b No\plain\f2\fs20  button to cancel.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs20\b Caution: \plain\f2\fs20 If you delete a scale any preset that uses it will no longer be playable.
\par 
\par Sometimes you will find scales with note values given in "cents". A cent is equal to 2 raised to the power of 1/1200 and will always be some value between 0 and 1200. The \plain\f2\fs20\b Cents to Ratio \plain\f2\fs20 calculator is used to convert these values into ratios that Kyma Pentatonic Chimes can use. Enter the cents value in the textbox below \plain\f2\fs20\b Convert\plain\f2\fs20 . As you enter digits you will see the ratio building in the textbox below \plain\f2\fs20\b Ratio\plain\f2\fs20 . You may need to adjust the cents value up or down to simplify the ratio. Reasonable numerator or divisor values will be limited to four digits or less. Copy or type the conversion values into the appropriate numerator or divisor textboxes until your scale conversion is complete.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b Can I run my Chimes in the Background?\plain\f2\fs20 
\par 
\par Yes. You can minimize the Kyma Pentatonic Chimes Window to clear your desktop then run any program that does not require use of your sound card. You may notice a slowing of calculation-intensive programs but you should not notice any decrease in the speed of word processors or similar programs.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b What About the Chime Sounds?
\par \plain\f2\fs20 
\par The individual chimes are not recordings. They were all created in the synthesizer program AdSyn32. This is a freeware additive synthesizer that is well written and easy to use. I recommend it very highly to anyone interested in sythesizing their own sounds.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b Is there More?
\par \plain\f2\fs20 
\par Ummm.... You can click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b Help\plain\f2\fs20  button if you would like to read this again. You can click on the \plain\f2\fs20\b About\plain\f2\fs20  button to find out how to reach me or check out the other programs on my web page.
\par 
\par Oh.... and you can click on \plain\f2\fs20\b Exit Program \plain\f2\fs20 when you want to listen to something other than chimes.
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs24\b Errata:
\par \plain\f2\fs20 
\par Kyma Pentatonic Chimes was programmed in Visual Basic 6.0 Professional Edition on a 133-mHz super-goosed 486 (aka AMD K-5) with 64 mB RAM running under Windows 95. DirectX 7.0 is used to provide the sound control. Performance is quite satisfactory even on this low-powered system. 
\par 
\par \plain\f2\fs16 Copyright (C) 2003 by Michael Hebert, Kyma Software\plain\f2\fs20 
\par }
 